Smart Spreadsheet - Project Explanation
1. High-Level Overview
Smart Spreadsheet is an AI-powered data management tool designed for Small and Medium Businesses (SMBs). It solves the problem of complex data analysis by combining a familiar spreadsheet interface with powerful AI automation.

Target Audience: Business owners and teams who need data insights without learning complex formulas or SQL.
Core Value: "Upload data, ask questions, get answers."
2. Frontend Architecture (Next.js 14 App Router)
Built with React, TypeScript, Tailwind CSS, and Shadcn UI.

Page Structure
Overview (/overview): Live dashboard.
Displays key metrics (Total Rows, Revenue, Orders) fetched from the backend.
Features an AI "Summarize Spreadsheet" button that generates text insights.
Automatic Visualizations: Bar and Line charts appear dynamically based on data.
Spreadsheets (/): Corresponds to 
app/page.tsx
.
The core workspace. Features a grid interface (react-data-grid) for viewing and editing data.
Includes an AI Assistant sidebar for chat-based data interaction.
Reports (/reports):
Placeholder for generating and downloading PDF/CSV reports. Currently a static UI.
Integrations (/integrations):
Marketplace UI for connecting tools (Google Sheets, Slack). Currently non-functional UI cards.
Settings (/settings):
Configuration for workspace profile and preferences. Form UI exists but does not persist data.
Key Components
Sidebar.tsx
: Handles app-wide navigation with active state highlighting.
StatCard.tsx
: Reusable component for displaying metrics with trends.
OverviewCharts.tsx
: Uses recharts to render data visualizations automatically.
AIAssistant.tsx
: Chat interface for the spreadsheet view.
3. Backend Architecture (FastAPI)
Built with Python (FastAPI), SQLAlchemy (Async), and Pandas.

API Endpoints
GET /api/overview/metrics:
Calculates total rows, columns, and numeric stats (min/max/avg).
Prepares data for frontend charts.
POST /api/ai/summarize:
Accepts a dataset ID.
Uses heuristics (or OpenAI) to generate a natural language summary of the data.
GET /api/datasets:
Manages uploaded spreadsheet files (CSV/Excel).
Data Storage
Database: SQLite (for MVP simplicity), scalable to PostgreSQL.
Models:
Dataset
: Metadata about the file.
DataRow
: Stores actual spreadsheet rows as JSON blobs for flexibility.
4. AI Features
The app currently features two main AI capabilities:

AI Summarization (Overview Page):
Input: Dataset metadata and sample rows.
Process: Analyzes column names and values.
Output: A text summary (e.g., "This dataset contains sales data...") and key insights (e.g., "Average Revenue is $230").
Fallback: Includes a robust heuristic mode that works without an API key for demos.
AI Assistant (Spreadsheet View):
Interface: Chat sidebar.
Functionality: Intended for Q&A (e.g., "Show me top sales"). (Note: Full NL-to-SQL logic is partially mocked for MVP stability).
5. Data Flow (End-to-End)
Ingestion: User uploads a CSV/Excel file -> Backend parses it with pandas -> Saves each row to 
DataRow
 table.
Visualization:
Frontend requests /api/overview/metrics.
Backend aggregates 
DataRow
 entries -> computes stats -> returns JSON.
Frontend receives JSON -> renders 
StatCard
s and passes data to 
OverviewCharts
 (Recharts).
AI Analysis:
User clicks "Summarize".
Frontend posts to /api/ai/summarize.
Backend samples data -> generates text -> returns JSON.
Frontend displays the summary in an animated panel.
6. Current State & MVP Readiness
Status: MVP Demo-Ready

Feature	Status	Notes
Navigation	âœ… Complete	Smooth transitions, full sidebar support.
Overview	âœ… Complete	Real data, charts, and AI summary working.
Spreadsheet	âš ï¸ Partial	Grid view works; editing/saving is basic.
Reports	ðŸŸ¡ Mock	UI only.
Integrations	ðŸŸ¡ Mock	UI only.
Settings	ðŸŸ¡ Mock	UI only.
Minimum Viable Product (MVP) Definition
To launch as a true MVP for customers, the following is required:

Persistence: Settings and Spreadsheet edits must save reliably to the DB.
Auth: User login/signup (currently single-tenant/open).
Import: Robust CSV upload handling (currently pre-seeded or basic).
7. Next Steps (Top 3 Priorities)
Implement File Upload: Allow users to drag-and-drop their own CSVs to populate the grid and overview.
Connect AI Chat: Connect the Spreadsheet Sidebar AI to the backend for real Q&A.
User Authentication: Secure the app with Supabase or NextAuth.
Explanation complete. Ready to define MVP scope.



Smart Spreadsheet - Demo Guide
Current Status: Demo Ready âœ…
The application is fully functional for a Minimum Viable Product (MVP) demo.

Key Features Implemented
Dynamic CSV Upload:
Users can upload any CSV file.
The system dynamically detects columns and data types.
Fix: Resolved crashes with mismatched column names.
Smart Grid:
Spreadsheet view automatically rebuilds columns based on the uploaded data.
Handles empty/null values gracefully.
Real-Time Analytics:
Overview Dashboard: Shows total rows, columns, and key numeric stats (Avg/Min/Max).
Interactive Charts:
Bar Chart: Compares first two numeric metrics.
Line Chart: Trends across all numeric metrics.
Enhanced: X-Axis now intelligently picks "Product Name" or "Date" labels instead of just row numbers.
AI Integration:
Summarization: Generates text summaries and key insights using OpenAI (with graceful fallback if no key).
Context-Aware: Sends only relevant metadata (stats, column names, samples) to protect privacy and save tokens.
How to Run the Demo
Backend:
bash
cd backend
venv\Scripts\uvicorn app.main:app --reload
Frontend:
bash
cd frontend
npm run dev
Flow:
Open http://localhost:3000/overview.
Click "Upload CSV" and choose any cleaned CSV (e.g., Sales Data, Inventory).
Watch the Stats Cards and Charts update instantly.
Click "Summarize" to see the AI generate insights.
Navigate to "Spreadsheet" tab to see the raw grid.
Recommended Features for V2 ðŸš€
To take this from MVP to a full commercial product, I recommend adding:

1. Data Cleaning & Transformation
AI Data Cleaning: "Fix missing values", "Normalize dates", "Deduplicate rows".
Formula Support: Add basic Excel-like formulas (=SUM(A1:A5)).
2. Advanced Collaboration
Real-time Cursors: See who else is viewing the sheet (using WebSockets).
Comments: Allow users to comment on specific cells or rows.
3. Deeper AI Capabilities
"Chat with Data": A chat interface to ask questions like "Show me sales > 500" which filters the grid.
Chart Generator: Let AI propose which charts to build based on the data shape.
4. Enterprise Features
Export: Download modified data as CSV/Excel (currently only visual).
Role-Based Access: separate Viewer/Editor permissions.